Define proxy mapping state more rigorously (#24)
tfpauly/quic-proxy: draft-pauly-connect-quic.md

document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 {{!RFC2119}} {{!RFC8174}}
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

# Required Proxy State {#mappings}

In the methods defined in this document, the proxy is aware of the QUIC Connection IDs

> being used by proxied connections, along with the sockets (UDP addresses and ports)

Author: Clarified

connection on the same set of IP addresses and UDP ports. CONNECT-QUIC allows
clients to specify either form of transport.

In order to correctly route QUIC packets in both tunnelled and forwarded modes, the proxy
needs to maintain mappings between several items:

> - Datagram flow, which is a flow of QUIC DATAGRAM frames specific to a single client QUIC connection to the proxy.

Author: ```suggestion
- Datagram flow, which is a flow of HTTP/3 DATAGRAMs specific to a single client QUIC connection to the proxy.
```

> - Client-facing socket, which is the set of UDP addresses and ports used to communicate between the client and the proxy.

Reviewer: Our implementation doesn't use connected sockets on the server - each QUIC server has a single client-facing non-connected UDP socket. Maybe just mentioning somewhere that this spec uses "socket" as a way to refer to a 4-tuple and that it can be implemented a variety of ways

Author: Added a note about what the term "socket" means for this document.

- Server-facing socket, which is the set of UDP addresses and ports used to communicate between the proxy and the target.
- Client Connection ID, which is a QUIC Connection ID used to route traffic to a client.
- Server Connection ID, which is a QUIC Connection ID used to route traffic to a target.

There are three required mappings, described below.

## Datagram Flow Mapping

> Each datagram flow MUST be mapped to a single server-facing socket. This datagram flow can be identified by datagram flow ID

Author: Updated the mapping to that!

within a unique QUIC connection between the client and the proxy.

~~~
Datagram flow => Server-facing socket
~~~

Multiple datagram flows can map to the same server-facing socket, but a single datagram flow cannot be mapped to multiple
server-facing sockets.

> This mapping guarantees that any QUIC packet sent from the client to the proxy in tunnelled mode can be sent to the correct

Reviewer: Well technically the client could send a packet with a flow ID that's unknown to the server

Author: Clarified the text to be about this particular flow ID

> target.

Author: I just tried arranging it the other way, but I think it was less clear. It flows right now as:
- Text description of the mapping requirement
- Diagram of the mapping
- Explanation for what the mapping means

> target.

Reviewer 2: Yeah that works for me.

## Server Connection ID Mapping

Each pair of Server Connection ID and client-facing socket MUST map to a single server-facing socket.

~~~
(Client-facing socket + Server Connection ID) => Server-facing socket
~~~

Multiple pairs of Connection IDs and sockets can map to the same server-facing socket.

This mapping guarantees that any QUIC packet sent from the client to the proxy in forwarded mode can be sent to the correct
target.

## Client Connection ID Mappings

Each pair of Client Connection ID and server-facing socket MUST map to a single client-facing socket.
Additionally, that same pair MUST map to a single datagram flow.

~~~

> (Server-facing socket + Client Connection ID) => Client-facing socket

Reviewer: I don't think that's right, the mapping should be to a QUIC connection, not a client-facing socket - because multiple QUIC connections can share a client-facing socket

Author: Yes, that's correct—and the QUIC connection implies the client-facing socket and datagram flow ID. Can switch the language.

Author: Updated the mappings. I think there are still two mappings — one to the QUIC Connection + Datagram Flow ID, and one to the client-facing socket (for forwarding).

Reviewer: Good point, agreed.

(Server-facing socket + Client Connection ID) => Datagram flow
~~~

Multiple pairs of Connection IDs and sockets can map to the same client-facing socket or datagram flow.

These mapping guarantee that any QUIC packet sent from a target to the proxy in either tunnelled or forwarded
mode can be sent to the correct client. Note that this mapping becomes trivial if the proxy always opens a new

> server-facing socket for every proxied QUIC connection. The mapping is critical for any case where server-facing

Reviewer: I'm not sure we've defined the term "proxied QUIC connection" anywhere. I ask because that's a concept that the proxy doesn't really have access to - the proxy can't distinguish between "two CIDs belonging to one connection" vs "two connections" if only short headers are involved

Author: Changed this to refer to the datagram flow ID, which is what it actually knows.

Reviewer: Thanks, I like that.

  Datagram-Flow-Id = sf-integer
~~~

# Client Behavior

A clients sends new CONNECT-QUIC requests when it wants to start
a new QUIC connection to a target, when it has received a new
Server Connection ID for the target, and before it advertises a new Client
Connection ID to the target.

Each request MUST contain a Datagram-Flow-Id header and an authority

> psuedo-header identifying the target. All requests for the same QUIC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pseudo-header identifying the target. All requests for the same QUIC
```

> Connection between a client and a target SHOULD contain the same Datagram-Flow-Id

Reviewer: Why is this a SHOULD and not a MUST? It's required for correctness

Author: So, my thought here was that a client _could_ decide to be sneaky and represent what is one connection between the client and the target as two subsequent flows to proxy, which could make it "migrate". It'd be some paranoid privacy thing, but I could see a reason it would be illegal as long as the client followed the rest of the rules.

Reviewer: That makes sense for the flow ID, but not for the authority - perhaps we say MUST be sent to the same authority and SHOULD be sent to the same Datagram-Flow-Id?

> and authority. Any mismatch in these would cause the proxy to treat the requests

Reviewer: We should address the discrepancy between authority and server-facing 4-tuple, they're not quite the same because DNS can return multiple results so we need to mention that the proxy has to save the authority in the mappings and reuse the DNS result from the first time around. (I'm also realizing the proxy really shouldn't perform happy eyeballs here because that would make things way more complicated)

Author: Added a paragraph about this in the proxy behavior section, since it really belongs there (the client doesn't really care)

Reviewer: Agreed, that's a better spot for it - I'll create new comments over there.

as different proxied connections, which would appear like a migration or NAT
rebinding event to the target.

Each request MUST also contain exactly one connection ID header, either Client-Connection-Id
or Server-Connection-Id. Client-Connection-Id requests define paths for receiving
packets from the target server to the client, and Server-Connection-Id requests define paths
for sending packets from the client to target server.

## New Proxied Connection Setup

The first time that a client uses a proxy for a given QUIC connection, it selects a new datagram
flow ID with an even-numbered value {{!I-D.schinazi-quic-h3-datagram}}.

> The first request the clients makes MUST contain the authority psuedo-header and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first request the clients makes MUST contain the authority pseudo-header and the
```

Datagram-Flow-Id and Client-Connection-Id headers, containing the selected datagram
flow ID and the Client Connection ID that will be used in the initial QUIC packets sent through
the proxy.

The client can start sending packets tunnelled within DATAGRAM frames as soon as this
first CONNECT-QUIC request for the datagram flow ID has been sent, even in the same QUIC
packet to the proxy. That is, the QUIC packet sent from the client to the proxy can contain a
STREAM frame containing the CONNECT-QUIC request, as well as a DATAGRAM frame that contains
a tunnelled QUIC packet to send to the target. This is particularly useful for reducing round trips
on connection setup.

Since clients are always aware whether or not they are using a QUIC proxy, clients are
expected to cooperate with proxies in selecting Client Connection IDs. A proxy
detects a conflict when it is not able to create a unique mapping using the Client Connection ID. 

> It can reject requests that would cause a conflict and indicate this to the client by replying with a

Reviewer: We should define the term of "conflict" before using it. It particular, one CID being a prefix of another is a "conflict" for the purposes of this draft.

Author: Added a section early on (in state requirements) about what conflicts mean.

Reviewer: New text LGTM

with unpredictable values. A conflict in Client Connection IDs is indicated by the server
replying with a 409 (Conflict) status to a request that contains a Client Connection ID.
A client also MUST NOT select the a matching Client Connection ID for its QUIC
connection to the proxy and its QUIC connection to the target, as this inherently creates
a conflict.

Note that packets sent in DATAGRAM frames before the proxy has sent its
CONNECT-QUIC response might be dropped if the proxy rejects the request.
Specifically, this can occur if the Client Connection ID hits a conflict and the proxy
returns a 409 (Conflict) error. Any DATAGRAM frames that are sent in a separate
QUIC packet from the STREAM frame that contains the CONNECT-QUIC request might
also be dropped in the case that the packet arrives at the proxy before the packet
containing the STREAM frame.

If the server rejects the first request that uses a specific datagram flow ID, the client
MUST retire that datagram flow ID. If the rejection indicated a conflict due to the
Client Connection ID, the client MUST select a new Connection ID before sending
a new request, and generate a new packet. For example, if a client is sending a

> QUIC Initial packet and chooses a Connection ID that is too short or hits a conflict

Author: Removed that bit—it's now explained in the "conflicts" section.

with an existing mapping to the same target server, it will need to generate a new
QUIC Initial.

## Adding new Client Connection IDs

> A client can add new Connection IDs to a proxied QUIC connection by sending
> a NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame.

Author: ```suggestion
A client can add new Connection IDs to a proxied QUIC connection by sending
a NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame to the target.
```

Prior to sending a NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame to the target for a client Connection
ID, the client MUST send a CONNECT-QUIC request to the proxy, and only send the
NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame once a successful response is received.

## Sending With Forwarded Mode

Once the client has learned the target server's Connection ID, such as in the response
to a QUIC Initial packet, it can send a request containing the Server-Connection-Id
header. The client MUST wait for a successful 200 (OK) response before using forwarded
mode. Prior to receiving the server response, the client MUST send short header packets
tunnelled in DATAGRAM frames. The client MAY also choose to tunnel some short header
packets even after receiving the successful response.

> If the client receives an error, such as a 409 (Conflict) response, it MUST NOT forward

Reviewer: This is ambiguous: the server could decide to reject the request because it doesn't like the authority (e.g. if the client sends "localhost" as the authority, the proxy really ought to refuse to proxy there). Another example is DNS failure. I think that we need a way to convey the scenario where "the proxy agrees to proxy to this authority and has opened a target-facing socket, but cannot use forwarding mode due to a conflict".

Author: Requests that include Server-Connection-Id are only about opening up forwarding paths, not creating new upstream connections. Thus, I think the correct response here is to not forward, whatever the particular error code; assuming that you already were able to open up a tunneling path with the earlier request.

Reviewer: I think this complicates the design - I'd rather think about any request being able to open up any mapping or socket - and I'd rather not use 4xx to indicate partial success - there are probably implementations out there that close the stream if the response isn't 2xx.

Author: Updated the text to clarify this. The stream will indeed be closed and failed with any 4xx response (that just doesn't invalidate a separate stream that requested non-forwarding proxying to the same authority).

> packets to the requested Server Connection ID, but only use tunnelled mode.

Author: Fixed this up!

QUIC long header packets MUST NOT be forwarded. These packets can only be tunnelled within
DATAGRAM frames to avoid exposing unnecessary connection metadata.

When forwarding, the client sends a QUIC packet with the target server's Connection ID
in the QUIC short header, using the same socket between client and proxy that was used
for the main QUIC connection between client and proxy.

## Receiving With Forwarded Mode

> Once a Client Connection ID has been accepted by the proxy, the client MUST be prepared to

Reviewer: As discussed in #23, it would be great to allow clients to disable forwarding mode

Author: So my thought here is that disabling forwarding is essentially just using CONNECT-UDP (which is fine). My question is if that is a separate method, like CONNECT-UDP, or if it is a CONNECT-QUIC request that has a flow ID and authority but no connection ID.

Reviewer: I think there's value in using CONNECT-QUIC without forwarding: one is allowing the proxy to only need one socket, another is if we decide to later add short header connection ID compression to CONNECT-QUIC

Author: Okay, updated text to allow either side to opt out of forwarding!

receive forwarded short header packets on the socket between itself and the proxy. It uses
the received Connection ID to determine if this packet was sent by the proxy, or merely
forwarded from the target.

# Proxy Response Behavior

Upon receipt of a CONNECT-QUIC request, the proxy validates the request,
tries to establish the appropriate mappings described in {{mappings}}, and
establish a new server-facing socket if necessary.

The proxy MUST validate that the request includes either the Client-Connection-Id or
the Server-Connection-Id header, along with a Datagram-Flow-Id header and an

> authority pseudo-header. If any of these is missing, the proxy MUST reject the

Reviewer 2: See earlier comment about more terse terms. We could then tighten this up to say soemthing "The proxy MUST validate that the CONNECT-QUIC request is either type X or Y..."

Author: Yeah, I think I may leave that for a later editorial cleanup. I am hesitant to add too much jargon yet.

request with a 400 (Bad Request) reponse. The proxy also MUST reject the request

> if the requested datagram flow ID has already been used on that client QUIC connection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if the requested datagram flow ID has already been used on that client-to-proxy QUIC connection
```

Author: ```suggestion
if the requested datagram flow ID has already been used on that client <-> proxy QUIC connection
```

with a different requested authority.

The proxy then determines the server-facing socket to associate with the client's
datagram flow. This UDP socket may already be open (from a previous request from this
client, or another). If the socket is not already created, the proxy creates a new one.
Proxies can choose to reuse server-facing sockets across multiple datagram flows, or
have a unique server-facing socket for every datagram flow.

If the request includes a Client-Connection-Id header, the proxy is receiving a request
to be able to route traffic back to the client using that Connection ID. If the pair of this

> Client Connection ID and the selected server-facing socket is unique, the proxy creates

Reviewer: I would phrase this as "avoiding conflict" instead of "unique" because conflicts here aren't only about equality

Author: ```suggestion
Client Connection ID and the selected server-facing socket does not create a conflict, the proxy creates
```

is sent, the proxy will forward any short header packets received on the client-facing socket that use
the Server Connection ID using the correct server-facing socket. If the pair is not unique,
the server responds with a 409 (Conflict) response. If this occurs, traffic for that Server
Connection ID can only use tunnelled mode, not forwarded.

Any successful (2xx) response MUST also echo any Client-Connection-Id, Server-Connection-Id, and
Datagram-Flow-Id headers included in the request.

The proxy MUST only forward non-tunnelled packets from the client that are QUIC short header
packets (based on the Header Form bit) and have mapped Server Connection IDs. Packets sent by
the client that are forwarded SHOULD be considered as activity for restarting QUIC's Idle
Timeout {{!I-D.ietf-quic-transport}}.

## Removing Mapping State

Each CONNECT-QUIC request consumes one bidirectional HTTP/3 stream. For any stream
on which the proxy has sent a response indicating success, any mappings for the request
last as long as the stream is open.

A client that no longer wants a given Connection ID to be forwarded by the proxy, for either

> direction, MUST cancel its CONNECT-QUIC HTTP/3 request {{!I-D.ietf-quic-http}}.

Reviewer 2: This section reads a little weird. I'll make a spin off issueo work on improvements for talking about request stream lifecycle; it should also cover the similar stuff described in H3's CONNECT section like what frames are valid.

Author: Sounds good, new issue welcome (and text welcome too!)

If the request includes a Client-Connection-Id header, the proxy is receiving a request
to be able to route traffic back to the client using that Connection ID. If the pair of this
Client Connection ID and the selected server-facing socket is unique, the proxy creates
the mapping and responds with a 200 (OK) response. After this point, any packets received
by the proxy from the server-facing socket that match the Client Connection
ID can to be sent to the client. The proxy MUST use tunnelled mode (DATAGRAM frames) on
the correct datagram flow for any long header packets. The proxy SHOULD forward directly to
the client for any matching short header packets, but MAY tunnel them in DATAGRAM frames.
If the pair is not unique, or the proxy chooses not to support zero-length Client Connection IDs,
the proxy responds with a 409 (Conflict) response. If this occurs on the first request for a given datagram flow,
the proxy removes any mapping for that datagram flow.

If the request includes a Server-Connection-Id header, the proxy is receiving a request
to allow the client to forward packets to the target. If the pair of this Server Connection ID

> and the client-facing socket on which the request was received is unique, the proxy

Author: ```suggestion
and the client-facing socket on which the request was received does not create a conflict, the proxy
```

forwarded from the target.

# Proxy Response Behavior {#response}

Upon receipt of a CONNECT-QUIC request, the proxy validates the request,
tries to establish the appropriate mappings described in {{mappings}}, and
establish a new server-facing socket if necessary.

The proxy MUST validate that the request includes either the Client-Connection-Id or
the Server-Connection-Id header, along with a Datagram-Flow-Id header and an
authority pseudo-header. If any of these is missing, the proxy MUST reject the
request with a 400 (Bad Request) reponse. The proxy also MUST reject the request
if the requested datagram flow ID has already been used on that client <-> proxy QUIC connection
with a different requested authority.

The proxy then determines the server-facing socket to associate with the client's
datagram flow. This UDP socket may already be open (from a previous request from this
client, or another). If the socket is not already created, the proxy creates a new one.
Proxies can choose to reuse server-facing sockets across multiple datagram flows, or
have a unique server-facing socket for every datagram flow.

> If a proxy reuses server-facing sockets, it SHOULD store which authorities (server names)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a proxy reuses server-facing sockets, it SHOULD store which authorities (which could be a domain name or IP address literal)
```

are being accessed over a particular server-facing socket so it can avoid performing a

> new DNS query and potentially choosing a different server IP address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
new DNS query and potentially choosing a different server IP address which could map to a different server.
```

> 

Reviewer: I'd suggest adding some text about how the server needs to resolve domain name authorities to IP addresses in the first place, we have text for reusing sockets but this might warrant its own paragraph

Author: Added some text on this above!

  Datagram-Flow-Id = sf-integer
~~~

# Client Request Behavior {#request}

> A clients sends new CONNECT-QUIC requests when it wants to start

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A client sends new CONNECT-QUIC requests when it wants to start
```
